The Olympic marathon
affords its runners
at least one moment of glory.
After more than 25 miles of
punishment along city streets -
that's more than
40,000 metres -
the final lap of the race
takes place inside the Olympic
Stadium.
When an athlete arrives
at the stadium
and hears the roar of the
crowd,
the pain and the suffering
becomes worthwhile.
Amazingly, the 1984 Marathon
in Los Angeles
was the first time
that moment of glory could be
experienced by female athletes.
Before the 1984 Games,
the longest race available for
women was the 1,500 metres.
Women had been barred
from track-and-field
competition altogether
until 1928, where the 800
metres
was the longest race
they were permitted to run.
Olympic officials considered
long-distance running
to be too demanding for women.
The Los Angeles marathon was
a huge step towards equality,
and the crowd knew it.
The noise that greeted
the USA's Joan Benoit
as she entered the stadium,
becoming the first female
marathon winner in history,
was spine-tingling.
She won by nearly
a minute and a half.
But not everyone came
bursting into the stadium
riding a crest of adrenaline.
Here, for instance, is how
Gabriela Andersen-Schiess
of Switzerland
entered the Los Angeles
Coliseum on August 5th 1984.
Just look at her go.
OK, perhaps Andersen-Schiess
is not the best example
of record-breaking speed,
but the performance of
this 39-year-old Swiss athlete
is far more memorable than
anything
even the winner managed
that day.
Despite battling heat
exhaustion,
and seemingly on the brink of
complete physical collapse,
she got around the course.
Sometimes, one lap of the track
can seem like a very long way
to go.
The crowd in the stadium sensed
that it was seeing something
special.
It stood to applaud
her every uncertain step.
Marathons are never easy,
but this one was brutal.
The race had started that day
in Santa Monica,
with temperatures of
around 19 degrees Celsius.
But by the time the race ended,
it was up around 25 degrees.
But more troubling than that
was the humidity -
that was climbing close to 95%.
Andersen-Schiess later admitted
that she didn't acclimatise
properly
to the conditions in Los
Angeles.
Crucially, she missed
the last aid station
before getting to the stadium.
She failed to take on water
when her body needed it most.
By the time she arrived
to the stadium,
a staggering bundle of agony,
Joan Benoit had been
the champion
for about 20 minutes.
Benoit ran way ahead of the
pack after about 15km
and never looked back.
When Andersen-Schiess appeared,
she was running on willpower
alone.
Medics immediately ran to her
aid,
but Andersen-Schiess
shooed them away -
if they gave her assistance
she would be disqualified.
It was no idle threat -
there was precedent.
Italy's Dorando Pietri had
his gold medal revoked in 1908,
when he had been helped
across the line.
Andersen-Schiess didn't
have a gold medal at stake
but her pride was on the line.
The medics saw that
Andersen-Schiess
was still perspiring,
which was a good thing.
It meant she did not
have heat stroke.
The medical situation was not
as dire as might be feared.
They allowed her to make her
journey
to the finish line unassisted.
When she got to the line
after 5 minutes and 44 seconds
on the track,
Andersen-Schiess finally broke
down.
Her time of 2 hours
48 minutes and 44 seconds
placed her 37th of
the 44 runners who finished.
It wasn't gold-medal pace,
but it was something to be
proud of.
Few performances
have ever represented
the spirit of competition,
determination and grit
as much as that lap by
Gabriela Andersen-Schiess,
and it made a mockery
of the old idea
that female athletes lacked
the heart and the willpower
to take on the toughest
long-distance challenge of all.